### Taxonomy of Lycanthropic Disease

A study on the dicotomy between Sanies Lupinus and Canis Hysteria.

#### by Enim Datorem, Imperial Scholar 
---
It is well known that there are a many strains of lycanthropic disease (see Karessen, On Lycanthropy). The most widespread and widely known variant of lycanthropy is the werewolf, though this discussion is applicible to all strains of lycanthropic disease. Due to several high-profile cases in the late third and early fourth era and a series of studies by renowned healers, Sanies Lupinus is well-known and commonly believed to be responsible for all cases of lycanthropy. In reality, while Sanies Lupinus is a werewolf disease, it is not the only one. There are two main variants of the disease: Sanies Lupinus and the lesser known Canis Hysteria. The variants are usually named by strain, such as "Ursus Hysteria" and "Sanies Ursinus" for werebears, and "Felis Hysteria" and "Sanies Felinus" for werelions. The variants are often used interchangeably, but there is a real difference between the two. Sanies Lupinus stems from a spell or curse, and spreads by blood. On the other hand, Canis Hysteria is a true disease, and can be spread by any direct contact with lycanthropes.

The two variants progress similarly. Assuming the infected did not ingest tainted blood directly, both have a three-day incubation period, before the infected transforms into a beast in a terrifying state of unquenchable bloodlust, with remittent transformations ranging from once per lunar cycle to nightly. It is rumored that cases of Sanies Lupinus allows greater control of the beast, but such claims have never been substantiated. While both diseases can be cured by conventional means during the incubation period, cures differ most after the infected has become a full lycanthrope. Those infected by Canis Hysteria can be completely cured by undergoing certain magical rites, such as the "Rite of the Wolf-Giver." It is well-known that a group of Glenmoril Witches would offer to perform this rite at the ancient Altar of Thrond on the isle of Solstheim during the Third Era, but few details are known. In contrast, Sanies Lupinus has no known cure beyond reversing the curse from the original source.

While there is much overlap between Sanies Lupinus and Canis Hysteria, they are two distict variants of the lycanthrope disease. Sanies Lupinus is often the only term used the describe the disease despite it likely being the rarer of the two variants.
